The calculation of insertion time for LTR-containing TE types and non-LTR types were different. For each LTR-containg TE, such as Copia and Gypsy, sequences for its paired LTRs (coordinates deposited in from .EDTA.intact.gff3) were extracted and were subject to pairwise alignment by MUSCLE. The alignment results was used to calculate the distance between paired LTRs with distmat functions in emboss. As a result, the insertion time for this LTR-containing TE was estimated as the distance divided by the molecular clock of 1.3-e8 per site per year. 






For non-LTR TE types, such as DNA/T, Helitron, and MITEs, sequences for 11 subtypes (EDTA annotated DNA_DTA, DNA_DTC, DNA_DTH, DNA_DTM, DNA_DTT, DNA_Helitron, MITE_DTA, MITE_DTC, MITE_DTH, MITE_DTM, MITE_DTT) were first extracted in 11 fasta files. Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) were conducted within each fasta file by blastn (v 2.9.0)84 with default settings. In the MSA result, the insertion time for aligned pairs were again calculated by MUSCLE (v 3.8.1551)81 alignment and followed distmat functions in emboss (v 6.5.0). If a TE aligned with multiple other TEs in MSA, only the best hit was used to calculate insertion time. At this point, the insertion time for each Mo17 TE was calculated. To calculate the insertion time of deletions, deletions were annotated as a TE category if at least 80% of the deletion overlapped with this TE category. If the deletion overlapped with multiple TEs in the assigned category, the average insertion time among those TEs were used. 